many of us have the evidence of lived
experience that alcohol makes you clever
charming and more attractive to the
opposite sex unfortunately there is the
more powerful evidence of robust science
which says that even small amounts of
alcohol are pretty bad for you there is
one drink which claims to be an
exception red wine
we're endlessly bombarded with news
reports telling us it might be just a
little virtuous
it's a part of the Mediterranean diet
which is meant to make you live longer
we know that it's not the alcohol that's
responsible for the supposed health
benefits of red wine but could there be
something else in here that offsets the
harm caused by the alcohol red wine is
thought to be good for you
because it's made using the grape skin
which contains a family of chemicals
called polyphenols these have been the
source of intense study for decades and
one has been probed more than most
resveratrol now we've known about this
chemical for a long time but it wasn't
until the 1990s that it was discovered
in red wine so why has it got scientists
so excited this is an East African
killifish
let's call him Arthur Arthur is a
handsome beast but sadly his time on
this earth is short just a few months
but that's useful for scientists who
study longevity so the scientists ran an
experiment to see if giving resveratrol
to fish like Arthur made them live
longer what they found was that the fish
in the experiment given the row spritual
lived up to 40% longer now that's pretty
astonishing if you're an African
killifish what you'll find if you read
beyond those headlines that say
something like a glass of red wine a day
keeps the doctor away is that at the
bottom of the article it will say that
the experiments were actually done on a
fish like Arthur a worm a fruit fly or
sometimes just cells in a dish
[Music]
so although the research may be
promising it doesn't amount to evidence
that red wine has health benefits that
mean you or I will live any longer and
even if we do one day discover that
resveratrol has significant beneficial
effects on people this still a catch
when it comes to getting it from wine
this is a glass of Pinot Noir
happens to be from the Yarra Valley in
Australia now Pinot Noir is a light red
with low acidity medium tannins and some
of the highest levels of resveratrol of
any wine in the world at around 10
milligrams per litre unfortunately
though most of the studies on
resveratrol have been done using
capsules like this and in order to get
as much or as Verrill out of my wine as
there is in this capsule I would need to
drink all of these bottles here so I'd
better get coming so despite many years
of research we're still not entirely
sure what lies behind red wines healthy
reputation and it may well be that we've
been looking at it the wrong way
when drunk in moderation as part of the
Mediterranean diet red wine accompanies
nutrient-rich foods like fruits
vegetables fish and nuts and the
evidence suggests that it's the diet
taken as a whole that leads to a longer
healthier life
now having one small glass of red wine
with food is not going to do you any
harm but you have to ask yourself
honestly when was the last time you did
that you're anything like me you have
one glass over dinner and then probably
another glass over dinner and then you
finish off the bottle in front of the
television with dessert so sadly red
wine is not some kind of delicious
medicine where the more you drink the
better it is for you I will just have
one more
you